# ESP8266 Print Server
Have you ever got frustated with your wired printer, looking to buy print servers? Then do check this out.

***What are print servers?***

A print server, or printer server, is a device that connects printers to client computers over a network. It accepts print jobs from the computers in the network and sends the jobs to the appropriate printers in the same network as per the print job recieved. It also does the following functionalities such as queuing the jobs locally to accommodate the fact that work may arrive more quickly than the printer can actually handle. Ancillary functions include the ability to inspect the queue of jobs to be processed, the ability to reorder or delete waiting print jobs, or the ability to do various kinds of accounting (such as counting pages, which may involve reading data generated by the printer(s)). Print servers may be used to enforce administration policies, limiting number of prints, limit color printing quotas, user/department authentication, or watermarking printed documents.

A print server may be a networked computer with one or more shared printers. Alternatively a print server may be a dedicated device on the network, with connections to the LAN and one or more printers. Dedicated server appliances tend to be fairly simple in both configuration and features. Print server functionality may be integrated with other devices such as a wireless router, a firewall, or both. A printer may have a built-in print server.

The traditional print servers available in the market are working similar to the principle of Raspberry Pi. Due to the fact that RaspberryPi can be used as a mini-computer itself, there is nothing much to see in it. But the cot of such print servers are high. They do cost around Rs.5000. This is nearly a cost of a new wired printer. So, there is a need for a cheap and featured print server.

This project aims at making a print server using an NodeMCU (ESP8266). 

***Printing Protocol***

This project uses the Internet Printing Protocol (IPP) for it's working. A printing protocol is a protocol for communication between client devices (computers, mobile phones, tablets, etc.) and printers (or print servers). It allows clients to submit one or more print jobs to the printer or print server, and perform tasks such as querying the status of a printer, obtaining the status of print jobs, or cancelling individual print jobs. Like all IP-based protocols, IPP can run locally or over the Internet. Unlike other printing protocols, IPP also supports access control, authentication, and encryption, making it a much more capable and secure printing mechanism than older ones.

IPP is implemented using the Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) and inherits all of the HTTP streaming and security features. For example, authorization can take place via HTTP's Digest access authentication mechanism, GSSAPI, or any other HTTP authentication method. Encryption is provided using the TLS protocol-layer, either in the traditional always-on mode used by HTTPS or using the HTTP Upgrade extension to HTTP.

*IPP uses the traditional client-server model, with clients sending IPP request messages with the MIME media type "application/ipp" in HTTP POST requests to an IPP printer. IPP request messages consist of key/value pairs using a custom binary encoding followed by an "end of attributes" tag and any document data required for the request (such as the document to be printed). The IPP response is sent back to the client in the HTTP POST response, again using the "application/ipp" MIME media type.*

Among other things, IPP allows a client to:

* query a printer's capabilities (such as supported character sets, media types and document formats)
* submit print jobs to a printer
* query the status of a printer
* query the status of one or more print jobs
* cancel previously submitted jobs

***IPP uses TCP with port 631 as its well-known port.***

### References
1. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Print_server
2. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internet_Printing_Protocol
